Page semi-protected

Franz Liszt

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to: navigation, search
[220px-Franz_Liszt_by_Nadar]
 
Liszt in March, 1886 – four months before his death – by Felix Nadar

Franz Liszt (born Franz Joseph Liszt) (German pronunciation: [ˈfʁants ˈlɪst];
Hungarian: Liszt Ferencz, in modern usage Liszt Ferenc, pronounced [ˈlist
ˈfɛrɛnt͡s];^[n 1] October 22, 1811 – July 31, 1886) was a prolific 19th-century
Hungarian composer, virtuoso pianist, conductor, music teacher, arranger,
organist, philanthropist, author, nationalist and a Franciscan tertiary.

Liszt gained renown in Europe during the early nineteenth century for his
prodigious virtuosic skill as a pianist. He was a friend, musical promoter and
benefactor to many composers of his time, including Frédéric Chopin, Richard
Wagner, Hector Berlioz, Robert Schumann, Camille Saint-Saëns, Edvard Grieg, Ole
Bull, Joachim Raff, Mikhail Glinka and Alexander Borodin.^[1]

As a composer, Liszt was one of the most prominent representatives of the New
German School (Neudeutsche Schule). He left behind an extensive and diverse
body of work in which he influenced his forward-looking contemporaries and
anticipated many 20th-century ideas and trends. Some of his most notable
musical contributions were the invention of the symphonic poem, developing the
concept of thematic transformation as part of his experiments in musical form,
and making radical departures in harmony.^[2]

Contents

  • 1 Life
      □ 1.1 Early life
      □ 1.2 Adolescence in Paris
      □ 1.3 Paganini
      □ 1.4 With Countess Marie d'Agoult
      □ 1.5 Touring Europe
      □ 1.6 Liszt in Weimar
      □ 1.7 Rome, Weimar, Budapest
      □ 1.8 Royal Academy of Music at Budapest
      □ 1.9 Last years
  • 2 Liszt as a pianist
      □ 2.1 Performing style
      □ 2.2 Repertoire
  • 3 Musical works
      □ 3.1 Piano music
      □ 3.2 Transcriptions
      □ 3.3 Organ music
      □ 3.4 Original songs
      □ 3.5 Programme music
      □ 3.6 Symphonic poems
      □ 3.7 Late works
  • 4 Literary works
  • 5 Legacy
      □ 5.1 Liszt's students
          ☆ 5.1.1 Early students
          ☆ 5.1.2 Later students
      □ 5.2 Liszt's teaching approach
  • 6 See also
  • 7 Notes
  • 8 References
  • 9 Bibliography
  • 10 External links

Life

Main article: Life of Franz Liszt

Early life

[220px-Maria_Anna_Lager]
 
Anna Liszt, née Maria Anna Lager (portrait by Julius Ludwig Sebbers between
1826 and 1837)

Franz Liszt was born to Anna Liszt (née Maria Anna Lager)^[3] and Adam Liszt on
October 22, 1811, in the village of Doborján (German: Raiding) in Sopron County
, in the Kingdom of Hungary, Austrian Empire.^[n 2] Liszt's father played the
piano, violin, cello and guitar. He had been in the service of Prince Nikolaus
II Esterházy and knew Haydn, Hummel and Beethoven personally. At age six, Franz
began listening attentively to his father's piano playing and showed an
interest in both sacred and Romani music. Adam began teaching him the piano at
age seven, and Franz began composing in an elementary manner when he was eight.
He appeared in concerts at Sopron and Pressburg (Hungarian: Pozsony,
present-day Bratislava, Slovakia) in October and November 1820 at age 9. After
the concerts, a group of wealthy sponsors offered to finance Franz's musical
education in Vienna.

There Liszt received piano lessons from Carl Czerny, who in his own youth had
been a student of Beethoven and Hummel. He also received lessons in composition
from Antonio Salieri, then music director of the Viennese court. Liszt's public
debut in Vienna on December 1, 1822, at a concert at the "Landständischer
Saal", was a great success. He was greeted in Austrian and Hungarian
aristocratic circles and also met Beethoven and Schubert.^[n 3] In spring 1823,
when his one-year leave of absence came to an end, Adam Liszt asked Prince
Esterházy in vain for two more years. Adam Liszt therefore took his leave of
the Prince's services. At the end of April 1823, the family returned to Hungary
for the last time. At the end of May 1823, the family went to Vienna again.

Towards the end of 1823 or early 1824, Liszt's first composition to be
published, his Variation on a Waltz by Diabelli (now S. 147), appeared as
Variation 24 in Part II of Vaterländischer Künstlerverein. This anthology,
commissioned by Anton Diabelli, includes 50 variations on his waltz by 50
different composers (Part II), Part I being taken up by Beethoven's 33
variations on the same theme, which are now separately better known simply as
his Diabelli Variations, Op. 120. Liszt's inclusion in the Diabelli project—he
was described in it as "an 11 year old boy, born in Hungary"—was almost
certainly at the instigation of Czerny, his teacher and also a participant.
Liszt was the only child composer in the anthology.

Adolescence in Paris

After his father's death in 1827, Liszt moved to Paris; for the next five years
he was to live with his mother in a small apartment. He gave up touring. To
earn money, Liszt gave lessons in piano playing and composition, often from
early morning until late at night. His students were scattered across the city
and he often had to cover long distances. Because of this, he kept uncertain
hours and also took up smoking and drinking—all habits he would continue
throughout his life.^[4]^[5]

The following year he fell in love with one of his pupils, Caroline de
Saint-Cricq, the daughter of Charles X's minister of commerce, Pierre de
Saint-Cricq. Her father, however, insisted that the affair be broken off.^[6]
Liszt fell very ill, to the extent that an obituary notice was printed in a
Paris newspaper, and he underwent a long period of religious doubts and
pessimism. He again stated a wish to join the Church but was dissuaded this
time by his mother. He had many discussions with the Abbé de Lamennais, who
acted as his spiritual father, and also with Chrétien Urhan, a German-born
violinist who introduced him to the Saint-Simonists.^[4] Urhan also wrote music
that was anti-classical and highly subjective, with titles such as Elle et moi,
La Salvation angélique and Les Regrets, and may have whetted the young Liszt's
taste for musical romanticism. Equally important for Liszt was Urhan's earnest
championship of Schubert, which may have stimulated his own lifelong devotion
to that composer's music.^[7]

During this period, Liszt read widely to overcome his lack of a general
education, and he soon came into contact with many of the leading authors and
artists of his day, including Victor Hugo, Alphonse de Lamartine and Heinrich
Heine. He composed practically nothing in these years. Nevertheless, the July
Revolution of 1830 inspired him to sketch a Revolutionary Symphony based on the
events of the "three glorious days," and he took a greater interest in events
surrounding him. He met Hector Berlioz on December 4, 1830, the day before the
premiere of the Symphonie fantastique. Berlioz's music made a strong impression
on Liszt, especially later when he was writing for orchestra. He also inherited
from Berlioz the diabolic quality of many of his works.^[4]

Paganini

[220px-NiccoloPaganini]
 
Niccolò Paganini. His playing inspired Liszt to become a great virtuoso.

After attending an April 20, 1832, charity concert, for the victims of a
Parisian cholera epidemic, organised by Niccolò Paganini,^[8] Liszt became
determined to become as great a virtuoso on the piano as Paganini was on the
violin. Paris in the 1830s had become the nexus for pianistic activities, with
dozens of pianists dedicated to perfection at the keyboard. Some, such as
Sigismond Thalberg and Alexander Dreyschock, focused on specific aspects of
technique (e.g. the "three-hand effect" and octaves, respectively). While it
has since been referred to the "flying trapeze" school of piano playing, this
generation also solved some of the most intractable problems of piano
technique, raising the general level of performance to previously unimagined
heights. Liszt's strength and ability to stand out in this company was in
mastering all the aspects of piano technique cultivated singly and assiduously
by his rivals.^[9]

In 1833 he made transcriptions of several works by Berlioz, including the
Symphonie fantastique. His chief motive in doing so, especially with the
Symphonie, was to help the poverty-stricken Berlioz, whose symphony remained
unknown and unpublished. Liszt bore the expense of publishing the transcription
himself and played it many times to help popularise the original score.^[10] He
was also forming a friendship with a third composer who influenced him,
Frédéric Chopin; under his influence Liszt's poetic and romantic side began to
develop.^[4]

With Countess Marie d'Agoult

In 1833, Liszt began his relationship with the Countess Marie d'Agoult. In
addition to this, at the end of April 1834 he made the acquaintance of Felicité
de Lamennais. Under the influence of both, Liszt's creative output exploded.

In 1835 the countess left her husband and family to join Liszt in Geneva; their
daughter^[clarification needed] Blandine was born there on December 18. Liszt
taught at the newly founded Geneva Conservatory, wrote a manual of piano
technique (later lost)^[11] and contributed essays for the Paris Revue et
gazette musicale. In these essays, he argued for the raising of the artist from
the status of a servant to a respected member of the community.^[4]

For the next four years, Liszt and the countess lived together, mainly in
Switzerland and Italy, where their daughter, Cosima, was born in Como, with
occasional visits to Paris. On May 9, 1839, Liszt's and the countess's only
son, Daniel, was born, but that autumn relations between them became strained.
Liszt heard that plans for a Beethoven monument in Bonn were in danger of
collapse for lack of funds, and pledged his support. Doing so meant returning
to the life of a touring virtuoso. The countess returned to Paris with the
children, while Liszt gave six concerts in Vienna, then toured Hungary.^[4]

Touring Europe

[300px-1839_Liszt_a_Vigadoban]
 
Franz Liszt's fundraising concert for the flood victims of Pest, where he was
the conductor of the orchestra, Vigadó Concert Hall, Pest, Hungary 1839
[220px-Franz_Liszt_by_Herman_Bi]
 
First known photograph of Liszt in 1843, at the height of his career

For the next eight years Liszt continued to tour Europe, spending holidays with
the countess and their children on the island of Nonnenwerth on the Rhine in
summers 1841 and 1843. In spring 1844 the couple finally separated. This was
Liszt's most brilliant period as a concert pianist. Honours were showered on
him and he met with adulation wherever he went.^[4] Franz wrote his 'Three
Concert Études' between 1845 and 1849.^[12] Since he often appeared three or
four times a week in concert, it could be safe to assume that he appeared in
public well over a thousand times during this eight-year period. Moreover, his
great fame as a pianist, which he would continue to enjoy long after he had
officially retired from the concert stage, was based mainly on his
accomplishments during this time.^[13]

In 1841, Franz Liszt was admitted to the Freemason's lodge "Unity" "Zur
Einigkeit", in Frankfurt am Main. He was promoted to the second degree and
elected master as member of the lodge "Zur Einigkeit", in Berlin. From 1845 he
was also honorary member of the lodge "Modestia cum Libertate" at Zurich and
1870 of the lodge in Pest (Budapest-Hungary).^[14]^[15] After 1842, "
Lisztomania" - coined by 19th Century German poet and Liszt’s contemporary,
Heinrich Heine - swept across Europe.^[16] The reception that Liszt enjoyed as
a result can be described only as hysterical. Women fought over his silk
handkerchiefs and velvet gloves, which they ripped to shreds as souvenirs. This
atmosphere was fuelled in great part by the artist's mesmeric personality and
stage presence. Many witnesses later testified that Liszt's playing raised the
mood of audiences to a level of mystical ecstasy.^[17]

On 14 March 1842 Liszt received an honorary doctorate from the University of
Königsberg - an honour unprecedented at the time, and an especially important
one from the perspective of the German tradition. Liszt never used 'Dr. Liszt'
or 'Dr. Franz Liszt' publicly. Ferdinand Hiller, a rival of Liszt at the time,
was allegedly highly jealous at the decision made by the university.^[18]^[19]

Adding to his reputation was the fact that Liszt gave away much of his proceeds
to charity and humanitarian causes. In fact, Liszt had made so much money by
his mid-forties that virtually all his performing fees after 1857 went to
charity. While his work for the Beethoven monument and the Hungarian National
School of Music are well known, he also gave generously to the building fund of
Cologne Cathedral, the establishment of a Gymnasium at Dortmund, and the
construction of the Leopold Church in Pest. There were also private donations
to hospitals, schools and charitable organizations such as the Leipzig
Musicians Pension Fund. When he found out about the Great Fire of Hamburg,
which raged for three days during May 1842 and destroyed much of the city, he
gave concerts in aid of the thousands of homeless there.^[20]

Liszt in Weimar

[220px-Barabas-liszt]
 
Franz Liszt, portrait by Hungarian painter Miklós Barabás, 1847

In February 1847, Liszt played in Kiev. There he met the Polish Princess
Carolyne zu Sayn-Wittgenstein, who was to become one of the most significant
people in the rest of his life. She persuaded him to concentrate on
composition, which meant giving up his career as a travelling virtuoso. After a
tour of the Balkans, Turkey and Russia that summer, Liszt gave his final
concert for pay at Yelisavetgrad in September. He spent the winter with the
princess at her estate in Woronince.^[21] By retiring from the concert platform
at 35, while still at the height of his powers, Liszt succeeded in keeping the
legend of his playing untarnished.^[22]

[220px-Franz_Liszt_1858]
 
Liszt in 1858 by Franz Hanfstaengl

The following year, Liszt took up a long-standing invitation of Grand Duchess
Maria Pavlovna of Russia to settle at Weimar, where he had been appointed
Kapellmeister Extraordinaire in 1842, remaining there until 1861. During this
period he acted as conductor at court concerts and on special occasions at the
theatre. He gave lessons to a number of pianists, including the great virtuoso
Hans von Bülow, who married Liszt's daughter Cosima in 1857 (years later, she
would marry Richard Wagner). He also wrote articles championing Berlioz and
Wagner. Finally, Liszt had ample time to compose and during the next 12 years
revised or produced those orchestral and choral pieces upon which his
reputation as a composer mainly rested. During this time he also helped raise
the profile of the exiled Wagner by conducting the overtures of his operas in
concert, Liszt and Wagner would have a profound friendship that lasted until
Wagner's death in Venice in 1883. Wagner held strong value towards Liszt and
his musicality, once rhetorically stating "Do you know a musician who is more
musical than Liszt?",^[23] and in 1856 stating "I feel thoroughly contemptible
as a musician, whereas you, as I have now convinced myself, are the greatest
musician of all times." ^[24]

Princess Carolyne lived with Liszt during his years in Weimar. She eventually
wished to marry Liszt, but since she had been previously married and her
husband, Russian military officer Prince Nikolaus zu
Sayn-Wittgenstein-Ludwigsburg (1812–1864), was still alive, she had to convince
the Roman Catholic authorities that her marriage to him had been invalid. After
huge efforts and a monstrously intricate process, she was temporarily
successful (September 1860). It was planned that the couple would marry in
Rome, on October 22, 1861, Liszt's 50th birthday. Although Liszt arrived in
Rome on October 21, the Princess declined to marry him that evening. It appears
that both her husband and the Tsar of Russia had managed to quash permission
for the marriage at the Vatican. The Russian government also impounded her
several estates in the Polish Ukraine, which made her later marriage to anybody
unfeasible.^[25]

Rome, Weimar, Budapest

[220px-Boesendorfer_Liszt_Franz]
 
Liszt giving a concert for Emperor Franz Joseph I on a Bösendorfer piano
[Liszt-1870]
 
Liszt, photo by Franz Hanfstaengl, June 1867

The 1860s were a period of great sadness in Liszt's private life. On December
13, 1859, he lost his 20-year-old son Daniel, and on September 11, 1862, his
26-year-old daughter Blandine also died. In letters to friends, Liszt
afterwards announced that he would retreat to a solitary living. He found it at
the monastery Madonna del Rosario, just outside Rome, where on June 20, 1863,
he took up quarters in a small, Spartan apartment. He had on June 23, 1857,
already joined the Third Order of St. Francis.^[n 4]

On April 25, 1865, he received the tonsure at the hands of Cardinal Hohenlohe.
On July 31, 1865, he received the four minor orders of porter, lector, exorcist
, and acolyte. After this ordination he was often called Abbé Liszt. On August
14, 1879, he was made an honorary canon of Albano.^[25]

On some occasions, Liszt took part in Rome's musical life. On March 26, 1863,
at a concert at the Palazzo Altieri, he directed a programme of sacred music.
The "Seligkeiten" of his "Christus-Oratorio" and his "Cantico del Sol di
Francesco d'Assisi", as well as Haydn's "Die Schöpfung" and works by J. S. Bach
, Beethoven, Jommelli, Mendelssohn and Palestrina were performed. On January 4,
1866, Liszt directed the "Stabat mater" of his "Christus-Oratorio", and on
February 26, 1866, his "Dante Symphony". There were several further occasions
of similar kind, but in comparison with the duration of Liszt's stay in Rome,
they were exceptions.

In 1866, Liszt composed the Hungarian coronation ceremony for Franz Joseph and
Elisabeth of Bavaria. (Latin: Missa coronationalis) The Mass was first
performed on June 8, 1867, at the coronation ceremony in the Matthias Church by
Buda Castle in a six-section form. After the first performance the Offertory
was added, and two years later the Gradual.^[26]

Liszt was invited back to Weimar in 1869 to give master classes in piano
playing. Two years later he was asked to do the same in Budapest at the
Hungarian Music Academy. From then until the end of his life he made regular
journeys between Rome, Weimar and Budapest, continuing what he called his "vie
trifurquée" or threefold existence. It is estimated that Liszt travelled at
least 4,000 miles a year during this period in his life—an exceptional figure
given his advancing age and the rigors of road and rail in the 1870s.^[27]

Royal Academy of Music at Budapest

[280px-Liszt_Ferenc_Zenem]
 
Liszt Ferenc Academy of Music in Budapest

Since the early 1860s there were attempts of some of Liszt's Hungarian
contemporaries to have him settled with a position in Hungary. In 1871 the
Hungarian Prime Minister Gyula Andrássy made a new attempt. In a writing of
June 4, 1871, to the Hungarian King (the Austrian Emperor Franz Joseph I ),
requesting an annual grant of 4,000 Gulden and the rank of a "Königlicher Rat"
("Crown Councillor") for Liszt, who in return would permanently settle in
Budapest, directing the orchestra of the National Theatre as well as music
schools and further musical institutions.^[n 5] By that time there were also
plans of the foundation of a Royal Academy for Music at Budapest, of which the
Hungarian state should be in charge.

The plan of the foundation of the Royal Academy was agreed by the Hungarian
Parliament in 1872. In March 1875 Liszt was nominated as President. The Academy
was officially opened on November 14, 1875 under Liszt's colleagues Ferenc
Erkel, the director, Kornél Ábrányi and Robert Volkmann and Liszt himself came
in March 1876 to give some lessons and a charity concert.

[260px-FranzLisztPiano]
 
One of Franz Liszt's pianos from his apartment in Budapest

In spite of the conditions under which Liszt had been appointed as "Königlicher
Rat", he neither directed the orchestra of the National Theatre, nor did he
permanently settle in Hungary.^[n 6] Typically, he arrived in mid-winter in
Budapest. After one or two concerts of his students by the beginning of spring
he left. He never took part in the final examinations, which were in summer of
every year. Most of his students were still matriculated as students of either
Erkel or later Henri Gobbi. Some of them joined the lessons which he gave in
summer in Weimar. In winter, when he was in Budapest, some students of his
Weimar circle joined him there.

In 1873, at the occasion of Liszt's 50th anniversary as performing artist, the
city Budapest had installed a "Franz Liszt Stiftung" ("Franz Liszt
Foundation"). The foundation was destined to provide stipends of 200 Gulden for
three students of the Academy who had shown excellent abilities and especially
had achieved progress with regard to Hungarian music. Every year it was Liszt
alone who could decide which one of the students should receive the money. He
gave the total sum of 600 Gulden either to a single student or to a group of
three or more of them, not asking whether they were actually matriculated at
the Academy.

It was also Liszt's habit to declare all students who took part in his lessons
as his private students. As consequence, almost none of them paid any charge at
the Academy. Since the Academy needed the money, there was a ministerial order
of February 13, 1884, according to which all those who took part in Liszt's
lessons had to pay an annual charge of 30 Gulden. Liszt did not respect this,
however, and in the end the Minister resigned. In fact, the Academy was still
the winner, since Liszt gave much money from his taking part in charity
concerts.

The lessons in specific matters of Hungarian music turned out to be a
problematic enterprise, since there were different opinions regarding what
exactly Hungarian music actually was. In 1881 a new edition of Liszt's book
about the Romanis and their music in Hungary appeared. According to this,
Hungarian music was identical with the music played by the Hungarian Romanis.
Liszt had also claimed in this work that Semitic people, among them the
Romanis, had no genuine creativity. Accordingly, within his book, he proposed
that they only ever adopted melodies from the country in which they lived.
After the book was published, Liszt was accused in Budapest of the spreading of
anti-Semitic ideas.^[n 7] The following year, there were no students seeking
lessons for matriculation in Hungarian music. According to the July 1, 1886
issue of the journal Zenelap, this subject had long since been dropped at the
Hungarian Academy.

In 1886 there was still no class for sacral music, but there were classes for
solo and chorus singing, piano, violin, cello, organ and composition. The
number of students had grown to 91 and the number of professors to 14. Since
the winter of 1879–80, the Academy had its own building. On the first floor
there was an apartment where since the winter of 1880–81 Liszt lived during his
stays in Budapest. His last stay was from January 30 to March 12, 1886. After
Liszt's death János Végh, since 1881 vice-president, became president. No
earlier than 40 years later the Academy was renamed to "Franz Liszt Akademie".
Until then, due to World War I, Liszt's Europe and also his Hungary had died.
Mainly, the only connection between Franz Liszt and the "Franz Liszt Akademie"
was the name.

On June 24, 1872, the composer and conductor Karl Müller-Hartung founded an
"Orchesterschule" ("Orchestra School") at Weimar. Although Liszt and
Müller-Hartung were on friendly terms, Liszt took no active part in that
foundation. The "Orchesterschule" later developed to a conservatory which still
exists and is now called "Hochschule für Musik "Franz Liszt", Weimar".

Last years

Liszt fell down the stairs of a hotel in Weimar on July 2, 1881. Though friends
and colleagues had noticed swelling in his feet and legs when he had arrived in
Weimar the previous month (an indication of possible congestive heart failure),
he had been in good health up to that point and was still fit and active. He
was left immobilised for eight weeks after the accident and never fully
recovered from it. A number of ailments manifested themselves—dropsy, asthma,
insomnia, a cataract of the left eye and heart disease. The last-mentioned
eventually contributed to Liszt's death. He became increasingly plagued by
feelings of desolation, despair and preoccupation with death—feelings that he
expressed in his works from this period. As he told Lina Ramann, "I carry a
deep sadness of the heart which must now and then break out in sound."^[28]

On January 13, 1886, while Claude Debussy was staying at the Villa Medici in
Rome, Liszt met him there with Paul Vidal and Victor Herbert. Liszt played Au
bord d’une source from his Années de pèlerinage, as well as his arrangement of
Schubert's Ave Maria for the musicians. Debussy in later years described
Liszt's pedalling as "like a form of breathing." Debussy and Vidal performed
their piano duet arrangement of Liszt's Faust Symphony; allegedly, Liszt fell
asleep during this.^[29]

The composer Camille Saint-Saëns, an old friend, whom Liszt had once called
"the greatest organist in the world", dedicated his Symphony No. 3 "Organ
Symphony" to Liszt; it had premiered in London only a few weeks before the
death of its dedicatee.

Liszt died in Bayreuth, Germany, on July 31, 1886, at the age of 74, officially
as a result of pneumonia, which he may have contracted during the Bayreuth
Festival hosted by his daughter Cosima. Questions have been posed as to whether
medical malpractice played a part in his death.^[30] He was buried on August 3,
1886, in the municipal cemetery of Bayreuth in accordance with his wishes.^[31]

Liszt as a pianist

Liszt was viewed by his contemporaries as the greatest virtuoso of his time
(although Liszt stated that Charles-Valentin Alkan "had the finest technique of
any pianist" known to him).^[32] In the 1840s he was considered by some to be
perhaps the greatest pianist of all time.^[n 8]

Performing style

There are few, if any, good sources that give an impression of how Liszt really
sounded from the 1820s. Carl Czerny claimed Liszt was a natural who played
according to feeling, and reviews of his concerts especially praise the
brilliance, strength and precision in his playing. At least one also mentions
his ability to keep absolute tempo,^[33] which may be due to his father's
insistence that he practice with a metronome.^[34] His repertoire at this time
consisted primarily of pieces in the style of the brilliant Viennese school,
such as concertos by Hummel and works by his former teacher Czerny, and his
concerts often included a chance for the boy to display his prowess in
improvisation.

[300px-Josef_Danhauser_Liszt_am_Fl]
 
Franz Liszt Fantasizing at the Piano (1840), by Danhauser, commissioned by
Conrad Graf. The imagined gathering shows seated Alfred de Musset or Alexandre
Dumas, George Sand, Franz Liszt, Marie d'Agoult; standing Hector Berlioz or
Victor Hugo, Niccolò Paganini, Gioachino Rossini; a bust of Beethoven on the
grand piano (a "Graf"), a portrait of Lord Byron on the wall, a statue of Joan
of Arc on the far left.^[35]^[36]^[37]

Following the death of Liszt's father in 1827 and his hiatus from the life as a
touring virtuoso, it is likely Liszt's playing gradually developed a more
personal style. One of the most detailed descriptions of his playing from this
time comes from the winter of 1831/1832, during which he was earning a living
primarily as a teacher in Paris. Among his pupils was Valerie Boissier, whose
mother Caroline kept a careful diary of the lessons. From her we learn that:

    M. Liszt's playing contains abandonment, a liberated feeling, but even when
    it becomes impetuous and energetic in his fortissimo, it is still without
    harshness and dryness. [...] [He] draws from the piano tones that are
    purer, mellower and stronger than anyone has been able to do; his touch has
    an indescribable charm. [...] He is the enemy of affected, stilted,
    contorted expressions. Most of all, he wants truth in musical sentiment,
    and so he makes a psychological study of his emotions to convey them as
    they are. Thus, a strong expression is often followed by a sense of fatigue
    and dejection, a kind of coldness, because this is the way nature works.

Liszt was sometimes mocked in the press for facial expression and gestures at
the piano.^[n 9] Also noted were the extravagant liberties he could take with
the text of a score at this time. Berlioz tells us how Liszt would add
cadenzas, tremolos and trills when playing the first movement of Beethoven's
Moonlight Sonata, and created a dramatic scene by changing the tempo between
Largo and Presto.^[n 10] In his Baccalaureus letter to George Sand from the
beginning of 1837, Liszt admitted that he had done so for the purpose of
gaining applause, and promised to follow both the letter and the spirit of a
score from then on. It has been debated to what extent he realized his promise,
however. By July 1840 the British newspaper The Times could still report

    His performance commenced with Handel's Fugue in E minor, which was played
    by Liszt with an avoidance of everything approaching to meretricious
    ornament, and indeed scarcely any additions, except a multitude of
    ingeniously contrived and appropriate harmonies, casting a glow of colour
    over the beauties of the composition, and infusing into it a spirit which
    from no other hand it ever before received.^[38]

Repertoire

During his years as a travelling virtuoso, Liszt performed an enormous amount
of music throughout Europe,^[39] but his core repertoire always centered around
his own compositions, paraphrases and transcriptions. Of Liszt's German
concerts between 1840 and 1845, the five most frequently played pieces were the
Grand galop chromatique, Schubert's Erlkönig (in Liszt's transcription),
Réminiscences de Don Juan, Réminiscences de Robert le Diable, and Réminiscences
de Lucia di Lammermoor.^[40] Among the works by other composers were Weber's
Invitation to the Dance, Chopin mazurkas, études by composers like Ignaz
Moscheles, Chopin and Ferdinand Hiller, but also major works by Beethoven,
Schumann, Weber and Hummel, and from time to time even selections from Bach,
Handel and Scarlatti.

Most of the concerts at this time were shared with other artists, and as a
result Liszt also often accompanied singers, participated in chamber music, or
performed works with an orchestra in addition to his own solo part. Frequently
played works include Weber's Konzertstück, Beethoven's Emperor Concerto and
Choral Fantasy, and Liszt's reworking of the Hexameron for piano and orchestra.
His chamber music repertoire included Johann Nepomuk Hummel's Septet,
Beethoven's Archduke Trio and Kreutzer Sonata, and a large selection of songs
by composers like Gioacchino Rossini, Gaetano Donizetti, Beethoven and
especially Franz Schubert. At some concerts, Liszt could not find musicians to
share the program with, and consequently was among the first to give solo piano
recitals in the modern sense of the word. The term was coined by the publisher
Frederick Beale, who suggested it for Liszt's concert at the Hanover Square
Rooms in London on June 9, 1840,^[41] even though Liszt had given concerts all
by himself already by March 1839.^[42]

Musical works

Main article: Musical works of Franz Liszt
See also: List of compositions by Franz Liszt

Liszt was a prolific composer. He is best known for his piano music, but he
also wrote for orchestra, and for other ensembles, virtually always including
keyboard. His piano works are often marked by their difficulty. Some of his
works are programmatic based on extra-musical inspirations such as a poetry or
art. Liszt is credited with the creation of the symphonic poem.

Piano music

         Hungarian Rhapsody No. 2
[50px-G] Performed by Martha Goldstein on an 1851 Erard piano
         ━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
Problems playing this file? See media help.

The largest and best-known portion of Liszt's music is his original piano work.
His thoroughly revised masterwork, "Années de pèlerinage" ("Years of
Pilgrimage") includes arguably his most provocative and stirring pieces. This
set of three suites ranges from the virtuosity of the Suisse Orage (Storm) to
the subtle and imaginative visualisations of artworks by Michelangelo and
Raphael in the second set. "Années" contains some pieces which are loose
transcriptions of Liszt's own earlier compositions; the first "year" recreates
his early pieces of "Album d'un voyageur", while the second book includes a
resetting of his own song transcriptions once separately published as "Tre
sonetti di Petrarca" ("Three sonnets of Petrarch"). The relative obscurity of
the vast majority of his works may be explained by the immense number of pieces
he composed, and the level of technical difficulty which was present in much of
his composition.

Liszt's piano works are usually divided into two categories. On the one hand,
there are "original works", and on the other hand "transcriptions",
"paraphrases" or "fantasies" on works by other composers. Examples for the
first category are works such as the piece Harmonies poétiques et religieuses
of May 1833 and the Piano Sonata in B minor (1853). Liszt's transcriptions of
Schubert songs, his fantasies on operatic melodies, and his piano arrangements
of symphonies by Berlioz and Beethoven are examples from the second category.
As special case, Liszt also made piano arrangements of his own instrumental and
vocal works. Examples of this kind are the arrangement of the second movement
"Gretchen" of his Faust Symphony and the first "Mephisto Waltz" as well as the
"Liebesträume No. 3" and the two volumes of his "Buch der Lieder".

He preferred to play either on a Bösendorfer or C. Bechstein piano, since they
were the only instruments capable of withstanding his tremendously powerful
playing.^[43]^[44]^[45]

Transcriptions

See also: Franz Liszt's treatments of the works of other composers

Liszt wrote transcriptions for piano of a wide variety of music. Indeed, about
half of his composing work (approximately 400 out of 800 items) are
arrangements of music by other composers.^[46] He played many of them himself
in his celebrated performances. In the mid-19th century, orchestral
performances were much less common than they are today, and were not available
at all outside major cities, so Liszt's transcriptions played a major role in
popularising a wide array of music such as the symphonies of Beethoven.^[47]

Cyprien Katsaris has stated that he prefers all the Liszt transcriptions of the
full Beethoven symphonies to the originals.^[citation needed] Hans von Bülow
admitted that Liszt's transcription of his Dante Sonett "Tanto gentile" was
much more refined than the original he himself had composed.^[n 11] Liszt's
transcriptions of Schubert songs, his fantasies on operatic melodies, and his
piano arrangements of symphonies by Berlioz and Beethoven are other well-known
examples of piano transcriptions.^[citation needed]

Organ music

Liszt wrote his two largest organ works between 1850 and 1855 while he was
living in Weimar, a city with a long tradition of organ music, most notably
that of J.S. Bach. Humphrey Searle calls these works – the Fantasy and Fugue on
the chorale "Ad nos, ad salutarem undam" and the Prelude and Fugue on B-A-C-H –
Liszt's "only important original organ works",^[48] and Derek Watson, writing
in his 1989 Liszt, considered them among the most significant organ works of
the nineteenth century, heralding the work of such key organist-musicians as
Reger, Franck, and Saint-Saëns, among others.^[49] Ad nos is an extended
fantasia, Adagio, and fugue, lasting over half an hour, and the Prelude and
Fugue on B-A-C-H includes chromatic writing which sometimes removes the sense
of tonality. Liszt also wrote some smaller organ works, including a prelude
(1854) and set of variations on the first section of movement 2 chorus from
Bach's cantata Weinen, Klagen, Sorgen, Zagen, BWV 12 (which Bach later reworked
as the Crucifixus in the Mass in B minor), which he composed after the death of
his daughter in 1862.^[25] He also wrote a Requiem for organ solo, intended to
be performed liturgically, along with the spoken Requiem Mass.^[48]

Original songs

Franz Liszt composed about six dozen original songs with piano accompaniment.
In most cases the lyrics were in German or French, but there are also some
songs in Italian and Hungarian and one song in English. Liszt began with the
song "Angiolin dal biondo crin" in 1839, and by 1844 had composed about two
dozen songs. Some of them had been published as single pieces. In addition,
there was an 1843–1844 series "Buch der Lieder". The series had been projected
for three volumes, consisting of six songs each, but only two volumes appeared.

Today, Liszt's songs are relatively obscure. As an exception, most frequently
the song "Ich möchte hingehn" is cited. It is because of a single bar, most
resembling the opening motif of Wagner's Tristan und Isolde. While it is
commonly claimed that Liszt wrote that motif ten years before Wagner started
work on his masterpiece,^[n 12] it has turned out that this is not true: the
original version of "Ich möchte hingehn" was composed in 1844 or 1845. There
are four manuscripts, and only a single one, a copy by August Conradi, contains
the said bar with the Tristan motif. It is on a paste-over in Liszt's hand.
Since in the second half of 1858 Liszt was preparing his songs for publication,
and he just at that time received the first act of Wagner's Tristan, it is most
likely that the version on the paste-over was a quotation from Wagner.^[n 13]
This is not to say the motif was originally invented by Wagner. An earlier
example can be found in bar 100 of Liszt's Ballade No. 2 in B minor for piano,
composed in 1853.^[n 14]

Programme music

         Totentanz
         Written in 1838, Liszt's "Dance of the Dead" was noted for its
[50px-G] highly-modernistic, even percussive piano part and evocative style,
         paving the way for horror-themed music.
         ━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
Problems playing this file? See media help.

Liszt, in some of his works, supported the relatively new idea of programme
music – that is, music intended to evoke extra-musical ideas such as a
depiction of a landscape, a poem, a particular character or personage. (By
contrast, absolute music stands for itself and is intended to be appreciated
without any particular reference to the outside world.)

Liszt's own point of view regarding programme music can for the time of his
youth be taken from the preface of the Album d'un voyageur (1837). According to
this, a landscape could evoke a certain kind of mood. Since a piece of music
could also evoke a mood, a mysterious resemblance with the landscape could be
imagined. In this sense the music would not paint the landscape, but it would
match the landscape in a third category, the mood.

In July 1854 Liszt stated in his essay about Berlioz and Harold in Italy that
not all music was programme music. If, in the heat of a debate, a person would
go so far as to claim the contrary, it would be better to put all ideas of
programme music aside. But it would be possible to take means like harmony,
modulation, rhythm, instrumentation and others to let a musical motif endure a
fate. In any case, a programme should be added to a piece of music only if it
was necessarily needed for an adequate understanding of that piece.

Still later, in a letter to Marie d'Agoult of November 15, 1864, Liszt wrote:

    Without any reserve I completely subscribe to the rule of which you so
    kindly want to remind me, that those musical works which are in a general
    sense following a programme must take effect on imagination and emotion,
    independent of any programme. In other words: All beautiful music must be
    first rate and always satisfy the absolute rules of music which are not to
    be violated or prescribed.^[n 15]

Symphonic poems

See also: Symphonic poems (Liszt)
[250px-Wilhelm_von_Kaulbach_001]
 
Die Hunnenschlacht, as painted by Wilhelm von Kaulbach, which in turn inspired
one of Liszt's symphonic poems.

A symphonic poem or tone poem is a piece of orchestral music in one movement in
which some extramusical program provides a narrative or illustrative element.
This program may come from a poem, a story or novel, a painting, or another
source. The term was first applied by Liszt to his 13 one-movement orchestral
works in this vein. They were not pure symphonic movements in the classical
sense because they dealt with descriptive subjects taken from mythology,
Romantic literature, recent history or imaginative fantasy. In other words,
these works were programmatic rather than abstract.^[50] The form was a direct
product of Romanticism which encouraged literary, pictorial and dramatic
associations in music. It developed into an important form of program music in
the second half of the 19th century.^[51]

The first 12 symphonic poems were composed in the decade 1848–58 (though some
use material conceived earlier); one other, Von der Wiege bis zum Grabe (From
the Cradle to the Grave), followed in 1882. Liszt's intent, according to Hugh
MacDonald in the New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians (1980), was for
these single-movement works "to display the traditional logic of symphonic
thought."^[52] That logic, embodied in sonata form as musical development, was
traditionally the unfolding of latent possibilities in given themes in rhythm,
melody and harmony, either in part or in their entirety, as they were allowed
to combine, separate and contrast with one another.^[53] To the resulting sense
of struggle, Beethoven had added an intensity of feeling and the involvement of
his audiences in that feeling, beginning from the Eroica Symphony to use the
elements of the craft of music—melody, bass, counterpoint, rhythm and
harmony—in a new synthesis of elements toward this end.^[54]

Liszt attempted in the symphonic poem to extend this revitalisation of the
nature of musical discourse and add to it the Romantic ideal of reconciling
classical formal principles to external literary concepts. To this end, he
combined elements of overture and symphony with descriptive elements,
approaching symphonic first movements in form and scale.^[51] While showing
extremely creative amendments to sonata form, Liszt used compositional devices
such as cyclic form, motifs and thematic transformation to lend these works
added coherence.^[55] Their composition proved daunting, requiring a continual
process of creative experimentation that included many stages of composition,
rehearsal and revision to reach a version where different parts of the musical
form seemed balanced.^[56]

Late works

See also: Late works of Franz Liszt

With some works from the end of the Weimar years, Liszt drifted more and more
away from the musical taste of his time. An early example is the melodrama "Der
traurige Mönch" ("The sad monk") after a poem by Nikolaus Lenau, composed in
the beginning of October 1860. While in the 19th century harmonies were usually
considered as major or minor triads to which dissonances could be added, Liszt
took the augmented triad as central chord.

More examples can be found in the third volume of Liszt's Années de Pélerinage.
"Les Jeux d'Eaux à la Villa d'Este" ("The Fountains of the Villa d'Este"),
composed in September 1877, foreshadows the impressionism of pieces on similar
subjects by Claude Debussy and Maurice Ravel. Other pieces such as the "Marche
funèbre, En mémoire de Maximilian I, Empereur du Mexique" ("Funeral march, In
memory of Maximilian I, Emperor of Mexico")^[n 16] composed in 1867 are,
however, without stylistic parallel in the 19th and 20th centuries.

At a later stage, Liszt experimented with "forbidden" things such as parallel
5ths in the "Csárdás macabre"^[n 17] and atonality in the Bagatelle sans
tonalité ("Bagatelle without Tonality"). Pieces like the "2nd Mephisto-Waltz"
are unconventional because of their numerous repetitions of short motives. Also
characteristic are the "Via crucis" of 1878, as well as Unstern!, Nuages gris,
and the two works entitled La lugubre gondola of the 1880s.

Literary works

Besides his musical works, Liszt wrote essays about many subjects. Most
important for an understanding of his development is the article series "De la
situation des artistes" ("On the situation of artists") which was published in
the Parisian Gazette musicale in 1835. In winter 1835–36, during Liszt's stay
in Geneva, about half a dozen further essays followed. One of them that was
slated to be published under the pseudonym "Emm Prym" was about Liszt's own
works. It was sent to Maurice Schlesinger, editor of the Gazette musicale.
Schlesinger, however, following the advice of Berlioz, did not publish it.^[n
18] In the beginning of 1837, Liszt published a review of some piano works of
Sigismond Thalberg. The review provoked a huge scandal.^[n 19] Liszt also
published a series of writings titled "Baccalaureus letters", ending in 1841.

During the Weimar years, Liszt wrote a series of essays about operas, leading
from Gluck to Wagner. Liszt also wrote essays about Berlioz and the symphony
Harold in Italy, Robert and Clara Schumann, John Field's nocturnes, songs of
Robert Franz, a planned Goethe foundation at Weimar, and other subjects. In
addition to essays, Liszt wrote a biography of his fellow composer Frédéric
Chopin, Life of Chopin,^[57] as well as a book about the Romanis (Gypsies) and
their music in Hungary.

While all of those literary works were published under Liszt's name, it is not
quite clear which parts of them he had written himself. It is known from his
letters that during the time of his youth there had been collaboration with
Marie d'Agoult. During the Weimar years it was the Princess Wittgenstein who
helped him. In most cases the manuscripts have disappeared so that it is
difficult to determine which of Liszt's literary works were actually works of
his own. Until the end of his life, however, it was Liszt's point of view that
it was he who was responsible for the contents of those literary works.

Liszt also worked until at least 1885 on a treatise for modern harmony. Pianist
Arthur Friedheim, who also served as Liszt's personal secretary, remembered
seeing it among Liszt's papers at Weimar. Liszt told Friedheim that the time
was not yet ripe to publish the manuscript, titled Sketches for a Harmony of
the Future. Unfortunately, this treatise has been lost.

Legacy

Although there was a period in which many considered Liszt's works "flashy" or
superficial, it is now held that many of Liszt's compositions such as Nuages
gris, Les jeux d'eaux à la villa d'Este, etc., which contain parallel fifths,
the whole-tone scale, parallel diminished and augmented triads, and unresolved
dissonances, anticipated and influenced twentieth-century music like that of
Debussy, Ravel and Béla Bartók.^[58]

Liszt's students

For Liszt's notable students, see List of music students by teacher: K to M
§ Franz Liszt.

Early students

Liszt was one of the most noted teachers of the 19th century. This part of his
career commenced after his father's death in August 1827. For the purpose of
earning his own and his mother's living, Liszt gave lessons in composition and
piano playing. According to a letter to Monsieur de Mancy on December 23, 1829,
his schedule was so full of lessons that each day, from half-past eight in the
morning till 10 at night, he had scarcely breathing time.^[n 20] Most of
Liszt's students of this period were amateurs, but there were also some who
made a professional career. An example of the former is Valérie Boissier, the
later Comtesse de Gasparin. Examples of the latter are Julius Eichberg, Pierre
Wolff, and Hermann Cohen. During winter 1835–36 they were Liszt's colleagues at
the Conservatoire at Geneva. Wolff then went to Saint Petersburg.

Cohen, who from George Sand received the nickname "Puzzi", developed into a
very successful pianist. Of Jewish origin, he was baptized on August 28, 1847.
On this day he experienced what he called an "apparition" of Christ, Mary and
the saints in an "ecstasy of love". A year later he became novice of a
Carmelite convent. When on October 7, 1850, he was professed, he took the name
Père Augstin–Marie du Très Saint Sacrament ("Pater Augustin–Mary of the Most
Holy Sacrament"). On April 19, 1851, he was ordained as a priest. In spring
1862 he met Liszt in Rome. After colloquies with Pater Augustin, Liszt decided
that he would himself become ecclesiastic.^[n 21]

During the years of his tours, Liszt gave only a few lessons. Examples of
students from this period are Johann Nepumuk Dunkl and Wilhelm von Lenz. Dunkl
received lessons from Liszt during winter 1839–40. He had introduced himself by
playing Thalberg's Fantasy Op. 6 on melodies from Meyerbeer's opera "Robert le
diable". Liszt later called him a "Halbschüler" ("half-student"). Lenz, from
St. Petersburg, had met Liszt already at the end of 1828. In summer 1842 he was
in Paris again where he received further lessons from Liszt. He was merely an
amateur with a repertoire of pieces such as Chopin's Nocturne Op. 9 No. 2. In
spring 1844, in Dresden, Liszt met the young Hans von Bülow, his later
son-in-law. Bülow's repertoire included Thalberg's Fantasy "La Donna del Lago"
Op. 40 and Liszt's Sonnambula-Fantasy.

Later students

Since Liszt had settled in Weimar, the number of those who received lessons
from him was steadily increasing. Until his death in 1886 there would have been
several hundred people who in some sense may have been regarded as his
students. August Göllerich published a voluminous catalogue of them.^[n 22] In
a note he added the remark that he had taken the connotation "student" in its
widest sense. As a consequence, his catalogue includes names of pianists,
violinists, cellists, harpists, organists, composers, conductors, singers and
even writers. Another catalogue was prepared by Carl Lachmund. In Lachmund's
catalogue his own wife's name, missing in Göllerich's catalogue, is included.
She had successfully persuaded Liszt to listen to her playing the harp. After
she had played a single piece, without Liszt's saying a word about it, she was
nominated as Liszt's student by her husband.

The following catalogue by Ludwig Nohl, headed with "Die Hauptschüler Liszts"
("Liszt's main students"), was approved in September 1881 and, with regard to
the order of the names, corrected, by Liszt.^[n 23]

Hans von Bülow           Carl Tausig                     Franz Bendel
Hans von Bronsart        Karl Klindworth                 Alexander Winterberger
Julius Reubke            Theodor Ratzenberger            Robert Pflughaupt
Friedrich Altschul       Nicolaus Neilissoff             Carl Baermann
Dionys Pruckner          Ferdinand Schreiber             Louis Rothfeld
Antal Sipos              Julius Eichberg                 Józef Wieniawski
Louis Jungmann           William Mason                   Max Pinner
Juliusz Zarębski         Giovanni Sgambati               Carlo Lippi
Siegfried Langgaard      Karl Pohlig                     Arthur Friedheim
Louis Marek              Eduard Reuss                    Bertrand Roth
Berthold Kellermann      Carl Stasny                     Julius Richter
Ingeborg Starck-Bronsart Sophie Menter-Popper            Sophie Pflughaupt
Aline Hundt              Pauline Fichtner-Erdmannsdörfer Ahrenda Blume
Anna Mehlig              Vera Timanova                   Martha Remmert
Sara Magnus-Heinze       Dora Petersen                   Ilonka Ravacz
Cäcilia Gaul             Marie Breidenstein              George Leitert

In 1886 a similar catalogue would have been much longer, including names such
as Eugen d'Albert, Walter Bache, Carl Lachmund, Moriz Rosenthal, Emil Sauer,
Alexander Siloti, Conrad Ansorge, William Dayas, August Göllerich, Bernhard
Stavenhagen, August Stradal, José Vianna da Motta and István Thomán.

Nohl's catalogue was not complete by far, and this even when the restriction to
the period since the Weimar years is neglected. Of Liszt's Hungarian students,
for example, only Antal Sipos and Ilonka Ravasz were mentioned. Sipos had
become Liszt's student in 1858 in Weimar, after Liszt had heard him playing at
a concert and invited him. In 1861 Sipos returned to Budapest, where in 1875 he
founded a music school.^[n 24] Ilonka Ravasz was since winter 1875–76 one of
Liszt's most gifted students at the newly founded Royal Academy for Music at
Budapest. Astonishingly, the names of Aladár Juhász and Károly Aggházy are
missing in Nohl's catalogue, although both had been among Liszt's favourite
students at the Hungarian Academy.

Also missing are the names of Agnes Street-Klindworth and Olga Janina. Agnes
Street-Klindworth had in 1853 arrived in Weimar, where she received lessons in
piano playing from Liszt and lessons in composition from Peter Cornelius. Until
1861 she was Liszt's secret mistress.^[citation needed] Olga Janina had joined
the circle around Liszt in 1869 in Rome. According to Liszt's impression, she
had rare and admirable musical talents.^[n 25] In his presence, she performed
his piano concertos in E-flat and A Major as well as further examples of his
works. Unfortunately, Olga Janina fell in love with Liszt. They had a short
affair, until in spring 1871—on Liszt's initiative—they separated.^[citation
needed]

Besides Liszt's master students there was a crowd of those who could at best
reach only moderate abilities.^[n 26] In such cases, Liszt's lessons changed
nothing.^[n 27] Several of Liszt's master students, however, were disappointed
with him.^[n 28] An example is Eugen d'Albert, who in the end was on nearly
hostile terms with Liszt.^[n 29] The same must be said of Felix Draeseke who
had joined the circle around Liszt at Weimar in 1857, and who during the first
half of the 1860s had been one of the most prominent representatives of the New
German School. In Nohl's catalogue he is not even mentioned. Also Hans von
Bülow, since the 1860s, had more and more drifted towards a direction which was
not only different from Liszt's, but opposite to it.

According to August Stradal, some of Liszt's master students had claimed that
Anton Rubinstein was a better teacher than Liszt.^[n 30] It might have been
meant as allusion to Emil Sauer, who had in Moscow studied with Nikolai
Rubinstein. During a couple of months in summers 1884 and 1885 he studied with
Liszt at Weimar. When he arrived for the first time, he already was a virtuoso
of strongest calibre who shortly before had made a concert tour through Spain.
The question of whether there was any change in his playing after he had
studied with Liszt remains open. According to his autobiography Meine Welt, he
had found it imposing when Arthur Friedheim was thundering Liszt's
Lucrezia-Fantasy. Regarding Liszt's playing a Beethoven Sonata, however, he
wrote, Liszt had at least given a good performance as actor. As his opinion,
Sauer had told his fellow students that Anton Rubinstein was a greater composer
than Liszt.^[n 31] In Sauer's own compositions, a piano concerto, two sonatas,
about two and a half dozen Etudes and several concert pieces, no influence of
Liszt as composer of the 1880s can be recognized.

Liszt's teaching approach

Liszt offered his students little technical advice, expecting them to "wash
their dirty linen at home," as he phrased it. Instead, he focused on musical
interpretation with a combination of anecdote, metaphor and wit. He advised one
student tapping out the opening chords of Beethoven's Waldstein Sonata, "Do not
chop beefsteak for us." To another who blurred the rhythm in Liszt's
Gnomenreigen (usually done by playing the piece too fast in the composer's
presence): "There you go, mixing salad again." Liszt also wanted to avoid
creating carbon copies of himself; rather, he believed in preserving artistic
individuality.^[59]

There were some pieces which Liszt famously refused to hear at his
masterclasses. Among them were Carl Tausig's transcription of J. S. Bach's
organ Toccata and Fugue in D minor, and Chopin's Scherzo No. 2 in B-flat minor.
Liszt also did not like to hear his own Polonaise No. 2 in E Major, as it was
overplayed and frequently badly played.

Liszt did not charge for lessons. He was troubled when German newspapers
published details of pedagogue Theodor Kullak's will, revealing that Kullak had
generated more than one million marks from teaching. "As an artist, you do not
rake in a million marks without performing some sacrifice on the altar of Art,"
Liszt told his biographer Lina Ramann. Carl Czerny, however, charged an
expensive fee for lessons and even dismissed Stephen Heller when he was unable
to afford to pay for his lessons.^[citation needed] Interestingly, Liszt spoke
very fondly of his former teacher—who gave lessons to Liszt free of charge—to
whom Liszt dedicated his Transcendental Etudes. He wrote the Allgemeine
musikalische Zeitung, urging Kullak's sons to create an endowment for needy
musicians, as Liszt himself frequently did.^[27]

See also

Book icon   • Book: Franz Liszt

  • Compositions by Franz Liszt
  • Cotton-top tamarin, a New World monkey which is called the Lisztaffe in
    German, or "Liszt Monkey", for its resemblance to Franz Liszt.
  • War of the Romantics
  • Cross motif

  • 'A' (PSF).pngClassical music portal
  • Bechstein Schriftzug.jpgPiano portal
  • P vip.svgBiography portal
  • Audio a.svgMusic portal

Notes

 1. ^ Liszt's Hungarian passport spelt his given name as "Ferencz". An
    orthographic reform of the Hungarian language in 1922 (which was 36 years
    after Liszt's death) changed the letter "cz" to simply "c" in all words
    except surnames; this has led to Liszt's given name being rendered in
    modern Hungarian usage as "Ferenc". From 1859 to 1867 he was officially
    Franz Ritter von Liszt; he was created a Ritter (knight) by Emperor Francis
    Joseph I in 1859, but never used this title of nobility in public. The
    title was necessary to marry the Princess Carolyne zu Sayn-Wittgenstein
    without her losing her privileges, but after the marriage fell through,
    Liszt transferred the title to his uncle Eduard in 1867. Eduard's son was
    Franz von Liszt.
 2. ^ Throughout his life he claimed to be Magyar, rather than German, and
    referred to Hungary as his homeland. When later in his life he gave charity
    concerts in Hungary, he sometimes appeared wearing national dress. (Walker,
    Franz Liszt: The Virtuoso Years, 1811–1847, p. 48)
 3. ^ At a second concert on April 13, 1823, Beethoven was reputed to have
    kissed Liszt on the forehead. While Liszt himself told this story later in
    life, this incident may have occurred on a different occasion. Regardless,
    Liszt regarded it as a form of artistic christening. Searle, New Grove,
    11:29.
 4. ^ See the document in: Burger: Lebenschronik in Bildern, p. 209.
 5. ^ See: Prahács: Briefe aus ungarischen Sammlungen, p. 353, n. 1 to letter
    221.
 6. ^ As consequence, there were complaints from the Hungarian Parliament.
 7. ^ Liszt was boycotted as a composer by the Budapest Philharmonic Society.
    On October 22, 1881, his 70th birthday, they gave a concert which the only
    pieces played were works by Brahms, directed by Brahms himself.
    Subsequently, Liszt refused to attend any further Philharmonic Society
    concerts.
 8. ^ An indication of this can be found in: Saffle: Liszt in Germany, p. 209.
    Regarding the 1840s Saffle wrote, "no one disputed seriously that [Liszt]
    was the greatest living pianist, probably the greatest pianist of all
    time." Since Saffle gave no sources, his statement can only be taken as his
    own point of view.
 9. ^ For example, see: Duverger, Franz Liszt, p. 140.
10. ^ See Berlioz's essay about Beethoven's Trios and Sonatas, in: Musikalische
    Streifzüge, transl. Ely Ellès, Leipzig 1912, pp. 52ff
11. ^ Compare his letter to Louise von Welz of December 13, 1875, in: Bülow,
    Hans von: Briefe, Band 5, ed. Marie von Bülow, Leipzig 1904, p. 321.
12. ^ For example, comp: Raabe: Liszts Schaffen, p. 127, and Walker: Virtuoso
    Years, p. 408.
13. ^ Compare the discussion in: Mueller, Rena Charin: Liszt's "Tasso"
    Sketchbook: Studies in Sources and Revisions, PhD dissertation, New York
    University 1986, p. 118ff.
14. ^ Still earlier examples from works of Machaut, Gesualdo, Bach, Mozart,
    Beethoven and Spohr can be found in: Vogel, Martin: Der Tristan-Akkord und
    die Krise der modernen Harmonie-Lehre, Düsseldorf 1962.
15. ^ Translated from French, after: Liszt-d'Agoult: Correspondance II, p. 411.
16. ^ The inscription "In magnis et voluisse sat est" ("In great things, to
    have wished them is sufficient") had in Liszt's youth been correlated with
    his friend Felix Lichnowski.
17. ^ Liszt wrote to the cover of the manuscript, "Darf man solch ein Ding
    schreiben oder anhören?" ("Is it allowed to write such a thing or to listen
    to it?")
18. ^ See the letter by Berlioz to Liszt of April 28, 1836, in: Berlioz,
    Hector: Correspondance générale II, 1832–1842, éditée sous la direction de
    Pierre Citron, Paris 1975, p. 295.
19. ^ For example, see Liszt's letter to J. W. von Wasielewski of January 9,
    1857, in: La Mara (ed.): Liszts Briefe, Band 1, translated by Constance
    Bache, No. 171.
20. ^ See: La Mara (ed.) Liszts Briefe, Band 1, translated to English by
    Constance Bache, No. 2.
21. ^ More details will be found in: Cross: "Puzzi" Revisited: A new Look at
    Hermann Cohen, in the Journal of the American Liszt Society, Volume 36 /
    July – December 1994, p. 19ff.
22. ^ See: Göllerich: Liszt, pp. 131ff. According to Göllerich's note, his
    catalogue was the most complete one which until then existed.
23. ^ See: Nohl: Liszt, pp. 112ff. The book includes the facsimile of a letter
    by Liszt to Nohl of September 29, 1881, in which Liszt approved the
    catalogue. Liszt's letter also includes his suggestions with regard to the
    order of the names.
24. ^ See: Prahács: Briefe aus ungarischen Sammlungen, p. 362, n. 1 to letter
    263.
25. ^ See his letter to Olga Janina of May 17, 1871, in: Bory, Robert: Diverses
    lettres inédites de Liszt, in: Schweizerisches Jahrbuch für
    Musikwissenschaft 3 (1928), p. 22.
26. ^ On June 17, 1880, it was Hans von Bülow, who gave the lesson instead of
    Liszt. He tried to get rid of those with minor abilities, but in vain. A
    couple of days later they went weeping to Liszt and were accepted again;
    see: Ramann: Lisztiana, p. 151, n. 55.
27. ^ For example, see: Stradal: Erinnerungen an Franz Liszt, pp. 157f.
28. ^ See: Stradal: Erinnerungen an Franz Liszt, p. 158.
29. ^ For example, see: Ramann: Lisztiana, p. 341.
30. ^ See his Erinnerungen an Franz Liszt, p. 158.
31. ^ See: Steinbeck: Liszt's approach to piano playing, p. 70.

References

 1. ^ Searle, New Grove, 11:29.
 2. ^ Searle, New Grove, 11:28–29.
 3. ^ Genealogy of the Liszt family: Marriage of Maria Anna Lager and Adam
    Liszt: pfarre-paudorf.com
 4. ^ ^a ^b ^c ^d ^e ^f ^g Searle, New Grove, 11:30.
 5. ^ Walker, Virtuoso Years, 131.
 6. ^ "Saint Cricq - Details of 1828 romance between Franz Liszt and Countess
    Caroline de Saint-Cricq". 
 7. ^ Walker, Virtuoso Years, 137–8.
 8. ^ The date is known from Liszt's pocket calendar.
 9. ^ Walker, Virtuoso Years, 161–7.
10. ^ Walker, Virtuoso Years, 180.
11. ^ For more details see: Bory: Une retraite romantique, pp. 50ff
12. ^ Burkholder, J. Peter. Northern Anthology of Western Music. p. 417. ISBN 
    978-0-393-92162-5. 
13. ^ Walker, Virtuoso Years, 285.
14. ^ "Full text of "Franz Liszt"". 
15. ^ Lipsius Biografie Fr. Liszt Porträt Klinkuht Musik Wesenberg St.
    Petersburg 1886
16. ^ Burton-Hill, Clemency. "Forget the Beatles – Liszt was music's first
    'superstar'". Retrieved 2016-08-19. 
17. ^ Walker, Virtuoso Years, 289.
18. ^ Humphrey Searle, The Music of Liszt, p. 131
19. ^ Alan Walker, Franz Liszt; the virtuoso years, p. 188
20. ^ Walker, Virtuoso Years, 290.
21. ^ Searle, New Grove, 11:31.
22. ^ Walker, Virtuoso Years, 442.
23. ^ "Franz Liszt". 
24. ^ https://books.google.com.au/books?id=3vntHRx-qjcC&pg=PA21&lpg=PA21&dq=
    wagner+on+liszt+greatest+musician+of+all+times&source=bl&ots=ASoMSG0A6b&sig
    =m9dDgUIQk-z_8f17mY41d4ygJhs&hl=en&sa=X&ved=
    0ahUKEwidz73C3fPLAhWBPKYKHTGNBrIQ6AEIQDAG#v=onepage&q=
    wagner%20on%20liszt%20greatest%20musician%20of%20all%20times&f=false
25. ^ ^a ^b ^c Alan Walker, Liszt, Franz in Oxford Music Online
26. ^ Michael Fend, Michel Noiray: Musical education in Europe (1770–1914):
    compositional, institutional, and political challenges (Volume II) page:
    542
27. ^ ^a ^b Walker, New Grove 2, 14:781.
28. ^ Walker: Final Years.
29. ^ Walker (1997), pp. 475-6.
30. ^ Walker: Final Years, p. 508, p. 515 with n. 18.
31. ^ LISZT, Derek Watson, p.160
32. ^ Lindeman, Stephan D.: Structural Novelty and Tradition in the Early
    Romantic Piano Concerto, Pendragon Press, 1999, p. 111, ISBN 978-1576470008
33. ^ Review of a concert in Marseilles on April 11, 1826, reprinted in
    Eckhardt, Maria: Liszt à Marseille, in: Studia Musicologica Academiae
    Scientarum Hungaricae 24 (1982), p. 165
34. ^ See Adam Liszt's letter to Czerny of July 29, 1824, in Burger:
    Lebenschronik in Bildern, p. 36.
35. ^ After the golden age: romantic pianism and modern performance by Kenneth
    Hamilton, p. 83, Oxford University Press 2008, ISBN 978-0-19-517826-5
36. ^ "Liszt at the Piano" by Edward Swenson, June 2006
37. ^ "Die Bildagentur bpk ist ein zentraler Mediendienstleister aller
    Einrichtungen der Stiftung Preußischer Kulturbesitz sowie weiterer
    führender Kultureinrichtungen des In- und Auslands.". 
38. ^ "Liszt's Recitals", The Times, 2 July 1840. p. 6
39. ^ Comp.: Walker: Virtuoso Years, pp. 445ff
40. ^ Comp.: Saffle: Liszt in Germany, pp. 187ff
41. ^ Walker: Virtuoso Years, p. 356
42. ^ Comp.: Óváry: Ferenc Liszt, p. 147.
43. ^ http://www.boesendorfer.com/en/special-and-designer-models/liszt
44. ^ http://www.boesendorfer.com/en/limited-edition/liszt-anniversary-grand
45. ^ http://bechstein.com/en/bechstein-the-legend/our-tradition/1850-1869.html
46. ^ by Alan Walker, Cornell University Press, 2005.
47. ^ Charles Rosen, The Super Power of Franz Liszt, New York Review of Books,
    Published 23 February 2012, Accessed 15 February 2012.
48. ^ ^a ^b Searle, 11:46
49. ^ Watson, 286
50. ^ Kennedy, 711.
51. ^ ^a ^b Spencer, P., 1233
52. ^ MacDonald, New Grove (1980), 18:429.
53. ^ Cooper, 29.
54. ^ Temperley, New Grove (1980), 18:455.
55. ^ Searle, "Orchestral Works," 281; Walker, Weimar, 357.
56. ^ Walker, Weimar, 304.
57. ^ "Life of Chopin by Franz Liszt - Project Gutenberg". Gutenberg.org.
    2003-08-01. Retrieved 2 November 2012. 
58. ^ Elie Siegmeister, in The New Music Lover's Handbook; Harvey House 1973,
    p. 222
59. ^ Walker, New Grove 2, 14:780.

Bibliography

  • Ed. Abraham, Gerald, Music of Tchaikovsky (New York, W. W. Norton & Company
    , 1946). ISBN n/a.
      □ Cooper, Martin, "The Symphonies"
  • Bory, Robert: Une retraite romantique en Suisse, Liszt et la Comtesse
    d'Agoult, Lausanne 1930.
  • Burger, Ernst: Franz Liszt, Eine Lebenschronik in Bildern und Dokumenten,
    München 1986.
  • Ehrhardt, Damien (éd.): Franz Liszt – Musique, médiation, interculturalité
    (Etudes germaniques 63/3, 2008).
  • Franz, Robert (i. e. Janina, Olga): Souvenirs d'une Cosaque, Deuxième
    édition, Paris 1874.
  • Göllerich, August: Musikerbiographien, Achter Band, Liszt, Zweiter Theil,
    Reclam, Leipzig, without date (1887–88).
  • Gibbs, Christopher H. and Gooley, Dana. Franz Liszt and his World.
    (Princeton : Princeton University Press, 2006.)
  • Gut, Serge: Franz Liszt, De Fallois, Paris 1989. ISBN 978-2-87706-042-4 .
  • Gut, Serge: Franz Liszt, STUDIO • VERLAG, Sinzig 2009. ISBN
    978-3-89564-115-2 .
  • Hamburger, Klara (ed.): Franz Liszt, Beiträge von ungarischen Autoren,
    Budapest 1978.
  • Hamilton, Kenneth (ed), The Cambridge Companion to Liszt (Cambridge and New
    York: Cambridge University Press, 2005). ISBN 0-521-64462-3 (paperback).
      □ Shulstad, Reeves, "Liszt's symphonic poems and symphonies"
  • Jerger, Wilhelm (ed.): The Piano Master Classes of Franz Liszt 1884–1886,
    Diary Notes of August Göllerich, translated by Richard Louis Zimdars,
    Indiana University Press 1996.
  • Ed. Latham, Alison, The Oxford Companion to Music (Oxford and New York:
    Oxford University Press, 2002). ISBN 0-19-866212-2
      □ Spencer, Piers, "Symphonic poem [tone-poem]"
  • Legány, Dezső: Franz Liszt, Unbekannte Presse und Briefe aus Wien 1822–1886
    , Wien 1984.
  • Legány, Dezső: Ferenc Liszt and His Country, 1869–1873, Occidental Press,
    Budapest 1983.
  • Legány, Dezső: Ferenc Liszt and His Country, 1874–1886, Occidental Press,
    Budapest 1992.
  • Liszt, Franz: Briefwechsel mit seiner Mutter, edited and annotated by Klara
    Hamburger, Eisenstadt 2000.
  • Liszt, Franz and d'Agoult, Marie: Correspondence, ed. Daniel Ollivier, Tome
    I: 1833–1840, Paris 1933, Tome II: 1840–1864, Paris 1934.
  • Lorenz, Michael: "An Unknown Grandmother of Liszt", Vienna 2012.
  • Loya, Shay: Liszt's Transcultural Modernism and the Hungarian-Gypsy
    Tradition. Eastman Studies in Music. Rochester, NY: University of Rochester
    Press, 2011. ISBN 9781580463232.
  • Motta, Cesare Simeone: Liszt Viaggiatore Europeo, Moncalieri, 2000 (ISBN
    8877600586)
  • Nohl, Ludwig: Musikerbiographien, Vierter Band, Liszt, Erster Theil,
    Reclam, Leipzig, without date (1881–82).
  • Ollivier, Daniel: Autour de Mme d'Agoult et de Liszt, Paris 1941.
  • Prahács, Margit (ed.): Franz Liszt, Briefe aus ungarischen Sammlungen,
    1835–1886, Budapest 1966.
  • Prahács, Margit: Franz Liszt und die Budapester Musikakademie, in:
    Hamburger (ed.): Franz Liszt, Beiträge von ungarischen Autoren, pp. 49ff.
  • Raabe, Peter: Liszts Schaffen, Cotta, Stuttgart und Berlin 1931.
  • Ramann, Lina: Lisztiana, Erinnerungen an Franz Liszt in Tagebuchblättern,
    Briefen und Dokumenten aus den Jahren 1873–1886/87, ed. Arthur Seidl, text
    revision by Friedrich Schnapp, Mainz 1983.
  • Rellstab, Ludwig: Franz Liszt, Berlin 1842.
  • Rosen, Charles. The Romantic Generation. Cambridge, Mass., Harvard
    University Press, 1995.
  • Ed. Sadie, Stanley, The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, First
    Edition (London: Macmillian, 1980). ISBN 0-333-23111-2
      □ MacDonald, Hugh, "Symphonic poem," "Transformation, thematic"
      □ Searle, Humphrey, "Liszt, Franz"
      □ Temperley, Nicholas, "Symphony: II. 19th century"
  • Saffle, Michael: Liszt in Germany, 1840–1845, Franz Liszt Studies Series
    No.2, Pendragon Press, Stuyvesant, NY, 1994.
  • Saffle, Michael: Franz Liszt: A Research and Information Guide. Third
    edition. New York: Routledge, 2009. ISBN 978-0-415-99839-0.
  • Sauer, Emil: Meine Welt, Stuttgart 1901.
  • Steinbeck, Arne: Franz Liszt's approach to piano playing, PhD dissertation,
    University of Maryland, College Park 1971.
  • Stradal, August: Erinnerungen an Franz Liszt, Bern, Leipzig 1929.
  • Walker, Alan: Franz Liszt, The Virtuoso Years (1811–1847), revised edition,
    Cornell University Press 1987.
  • Walker, Alan: Franz Liszt, The Final Years (1861–1886), Cornell University
    Press 1997.
  • Walker, Alan: Article Liszt, Franz, in: Sadie, Stanley (ed.), The New Grove
    Dictionary of Music and Musicians, Second Edition, London 2001).
  • Walker, Alan et al. "Liszt, Franz." Grove Music Online. Oxford Music
    Online. November 20, 2009. (subscription required)
  • Watson, Derek: Liszt, Schirmer Books, 1989, ISBN 0-02-872705-3

External links

● Wikimedia Commons has media related to Franz Liszt.

[34p] Wikiquote has quotations related to: Franz Liszt

[38px] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article
       Liszt, Franz.

  • Franz Liszt at DMOZ
  • Free scores by Franz Liszt at the International Music Score Library Project
  • Free scores by Franz Liszt in the Choral Public Domain Library (ChoralWiki)
  • Works by Franz Liszt at Project Gutenberg
  • Works by or about Franz Liszt at Internet Archive
  • Works by Franz Liszt at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) ●
  • "Liszt material". BBC Radio 3 archives. 
  • The Mutopia Project has compositions by Franz Liszt

                                       • v
                                       • t
                                       • e

                                  Franz Liszt
                             • Don Sanche
          Operas             • Sardanapale (unfinished)

                             • Ce qu'on entend sur la montagne
                             • Tasso
                             • Les préludes
                             • Orpheus
                             • Prometheus
                             • Mazeppa
     Symphonic poems         • Festklänge
                             • Héroïde funèbre
                             • Hungaria
                             • Hamlet
                             • Hunnenschlacht
                             • Die Ideale

                             • Faust Symphony
  Other orchestral works     • Dante Symphony
                             • Mephisto Waltzes

                             • Hungarian Fantasy
                             • Piano Concerto No. 1
   Works for piano and       • Piano Concerto No. 2
        orchestra            • Piano Concerto No. 3
                             • Totentanz

                             • Transcendental Études
                             • Grandes études de Paganini
                             • Ab Irato
                             • Three Concert Études
                             • Two Concert Études
                             • Variation on a Waltz by Diabelli
                             • Années de pèlerinage
                             • Dante Sonata
                             • Feuille d'album
                             • Ballade No. 1
                             • Ballade No. 2
                             • Consolations
                             • Harmonies poétiques et religieuses
                             • Deux légendes
                             • Sonata in B minor
Original solo piano works    • Sarabande and Chaconne
                             • Weihnachtsbaum
                             • Dem Andenken Petőfis
                             • Nuages gris
                             • La lugubre gondola
                             • Valse-Impromptu
                             • Mephisto Waltzes
                             • Bagatelle sans tonalité
                             • Mephisto Polka
                             • Grand galop chromatique
                             • Csárdás
                             • Hungarian Rhapsodies
                             • Glanes de Woronince
                             • Rondeau fantastique
                             • Rhapsodie espagnole
                             • Liebesträume

                             • Réminiscences de Don Juan
  Opera paraphrases for      • Fantasy on Themes from Mozart's Figaro and Don
          piano                Giovanni

                             • Adam Liszt (father)
          Family             • Cosima Wagner (daughter)

                             • Life
                             • Musical works
                             • Later works
     Related articles        • Treatments of the works of other composers
                             • Franz Liszt Academy of Music
                             • International Franz Liszt Piano Competition
                             • Lisztomania

Wikipedia book Book:Franz Liszt List-Class article List of compositions by
Franz Liszt

                  • v
                  • t
                  • e

          New German School
  • Allgemeiner Deutscher Musikverein
  • Hector Berlioz
  • Franz Liszt
  • Richard Wagner

                        • v
                        • t
                        • e

                   Romanticism
                  • Denmark
                  • England (literature)
                  • France (literature)
                  • Germany
   Countries      • Norway
                  • Poland
                  • Russia (literature)
                  • Scotland

                  • Bohemianism
                  • Counter-Enlightenment
                  • Dark romanticism
                  • Düsseldorf School
                  • Gesamtkunstwerk
                  • Gothic fiction
                  • Gothic Revival (architecture)
                  • Hudson River School
                  • Indianism
   Movements      • Nazarene movement
                  • Ossian
                  • Romantic hero
                  • Romanticism in science
                  • Romantic nationalism
                  • Opium and Romanticism
                  • Transcendentalism
                  • Ultra-Romanticism
                  • Wallenrodism

                  • Abovian
                  • Alencar
                  • Alfieri
                  • Andersen
                  • A. v. Arnim
                  • B. v. Arnim
                  • Azevedo
                  • Baratashvili
                  • Baratynsky
                  • Barbauld (Aikin)
                  • Batyushkov
                  • Baudelaire
                  • Beer
                  • Bertrand
                  • Blake
                  • Botev
                  • Brentano
                  • Bryant
                  • Burns
                  • Byron
                  • Castelo Branco
                  • Castilho
                  • Cazotte
                  • Chateaubriand
                  • Chavchavadze
                  • Clare
                  • Coleridge
                  • Cooper
                  • De Quincey
                  • Dias
                  • Dumas
                  • Eichendorff
                  • Emerson
                  • Eminescu
                  • Espronceda
                  • Fouqué
                  • Foscolo
                  • Garrett
                  • Gautier
                  • Goethe
                  • Grimm Brothers
                  • Gutzkow
                  • Hauff
                  • Hawthorne
                  • Heine
                  • Heliade
                  • Herculano
                  • Hoffmann
                  • Hölderlin
                  • Hugo
    Writers       • Ilić
                  • Irving
                  • Jakšić
                  • Jean Paul
                  • Karadžić
                  • Karamzin
                  • Keats
                  • Kleist
                  • Krasiński
                  • Lamartine
                  • Larra
                  • Leopardi
                  • Lermontov
                  • Mácha
                  • Magalhães
                  • Malczewski
                  • Manzoni
                  • Maturin
                  • Mickiewicz
                  • Musset
                  • Nalbandian
                  • Nerval
                  • Nodier
                  • Norwid
                  • Novalis
                  • Oehlenschläger
                  • Orbeliani
                  • Poe
                  • Polidori
                  • Potocki
                  • Prešeren
                  • Pushkin
                  • Raffi
                  • Schiller
                  • Schwab
                  • Scott
                  • Seward
                  • M. Shelley
                  • P. B. Shelley
                  • Shevchenko
                  • Słowacki
                  • De Staël
                  • Stendhal
                  • Tieck
                  • Tyutchev
                  • Uhland
                  • Vörösmarty
                  • Vyazemsky
                  • Wordsworth
                  • Zhukovsky
                  • Zorrilla

                  • Adam
                  • Alkan
                  • Auber
                  • Beethoven
                  • Bellini
                  • Bennett
                  • Berlioz
                  • Bertin
                  • Berwald
                  • Chopin
                  • Dargomyzhsky
                  • Félicien David
                  • Ferdinand David
                  • Donizetti
                  • Field
                  • Franck
                  • Franz
                  • Glinka
                  • Gomis
                  • Halévy
                  • Kalkbrenner
                  • Liszt
                  • Loewe
                  • Marschner
                  • Masarnau
     Music        • Méhul
                  • Fanny Mendelssohn
                  • Felix Mendelssohn
                  • Méreaux
                  • Meyerbeer
                  • Moniuszko
                  • Moscheles
                  • Niedermeyer
                  • Onslow
                  • Paganini
                  • Prudent
                  • Reicha
                  • Rossini
                  • Rubinstein
                  • Schubert
                  • Clara Schumann
                  • Robert Schumann
                  • Smetana
                  • Sor
                  • Spohr
                  • Spontini
                  • Thalberg
                  • Verdi
                  • Voříšek
                  • Wagner
                  • Weber

                  • Chaadayev
                  • Coleridge
                  • Feuerbach
                  • Fichte
                  • Goethe
                  • Hegel
                  • Khomyakov
                  • Müller
Theologians and   • Ritschl
 philosophers     • Rousseau
                  • Schiller
                  • A. Schlegel
                  • F. Schlegel
                  • Schopenhauer
                  • Schleiermacher
                  • Tieck
                  • Wackenroder

                  • Aivazovsky
                  • Bierstadt
                  • Blake
                  • Bonington
                  • Bryullov
                  • Chassériau
                  • Church
                  • Constable
                  • Cole
                  • Corot
                  • Dahl
                  • David d'Angers
                  • Delacroix
                  • Friedrich
                  • Fuseli
                  • Géricault
                  • Girodet
                  • Głowacki
                  • Goya
                  • Gude
                  • Hayez
                  • Janmot
                  • Jones
                  • Kiprensky
Visual artists    • Koch
                  • Lampi
                  • Leutze
                  • Loutherbourg
                  • Maison
                  • Martin
                  • Michałowski
                  • Palmer
                  • Porto-Alegre
                  • Préault
                  • Révoil
                  • Richard
                  • Rude
                  • Runge
                  • Saleh
                  • Scheffer
                  • Stattler
                  • Stroj
                  • Tidemand
                  • Tropinin
                  • Turner
                  • Veit
                  • Ward
                  • Wiertz

 « Age of Enlightenment
Realism » 

                    • WorldCat Identities
                    • VIAF: 64199483
                    • LCCN: n79079048
                    • ISNI: 0000 0001 2280 979X
                    • GND: 118573527
                    • SELIBR: 208502
                    • SUDOC: 026991535
                    • BNF: cb139773750 (data)
Authority control   • BPN: 49289277
                    • BIBSYS: 90066794
                    • ULAN: 500330920
                    • HDS: 41459
                    • MusicBrainz: 2cd475bb-1abd-40c4-9904-6d4b691c752c
                    • NLA: 35308243
                    • NDL: 00523887
                    • NKC: jn19981001756
                    • ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\029699
                    • BNE: XX963604

*
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Franz_Liszt&oldid=
752730525"
Categories:

  • Franz Liszt
  • 1811 births
  • 1886 deaths
  • 19th-century classical composers
  • 19th-century classical pianists
  • 19th-century Hungarian musicians
  • 19th-century Hungarian people
  • 19th-century organists
  • Child classical musicians
  • Composers for pedal piano
  • Composers for piano
  • Composers for pipe organ
  • Honorary Members of the Royal Philharmonic Society
  • Hungarian classical composers
  • Hungarian classical organists
  • Hungarian classical pianists
  • Hungarian-German people
  • Hungarian music educators
  • Hungarian people of Austrian descent
  • Hungarian Roman Catholics
  • Male classical composers
  • Organ improvisers
  • People from Oberpullendorf District
  • Piano pedagogues
  • Pupils of Carl Czerny
  • Recipients of the Pour le Mérite (civil class)
  • Roman Catholic clergy
  • Romantic composers
  • Members of the Third Order of Saint Francis

Hidden categories:

  • Pages using ISBN magic links
  • Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages
  • Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism
  • Use mdy dates from August 2011
  • Articles containing Hungarian-language text
  • Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2013
  • Articles with hAudio microformats
  • All articles with unsourced statements
  • Articles with unsourced statements from June 2016
  • Articles with unsourced statements from December 2009
  • Articles containing Latin-language text
  • Articles with unsourced statements from March 2012
  • Articles with unsourced statements from January 2013
  • Pages containing links to subscription-only content
  • Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata
  • Articles with DMOZ links
  • Composers with IMSLP links
  • Articles with International Music Score Library Project links
  • Articles with Project Gutenberg links
  • Articles with Internet Archive links
  • Articles with LibriVox links
  • AC with 17 elements
  • Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers
  • Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
  • Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers
  • Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
  • Wikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiers
  • Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers
  • Wikipedia articles with BPN identifiers
  • Wikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiers
  • Wikipedia articles with ULAN identifiers
  • Wikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiers
  • Wikipedia articles with NLA identifiers
  • Wikipedia articles with SBN identifiers

Navigation menu

Personal tools

  • Not logged in
  • Talk
  • Contributions
  • Create account
  • Log in

Namespaces

  • Article
  • Talk

Variants 

Views

  • Read
  • View source
  • View history

More 

Search

[                    ][Search][Go]
 

Navigation

  • Main page
  • Contents
  • Featured content
  • Current events
  • Random article
  • Donate to Wikipedia
  • Wikipedia store

Interaction

  • Help
  • About Wikipedia
  • Community portal
  • Recent changes
  • Contact page

Tools

  • What links here
  • Related changes
  • Upload file
  • Special pages
  • Permanent link
  • Page information
  • Wikidata item
  • Cite this page

Print/export

  • Create a book
  • Download as PDF
  • Printable version

In other projects

  • Wikimedia Commons
  • Wikiquote

Languages

  • Alemannisch
  • العربية
  • Aragonés
  • Armãneashti
  • Asturianu
  • Azərbaycanca
  • বাংলা
  • Bân-lâm-gú
  • Беларуская
  • Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
  • Български
  • Bosanski
  • Brezhoneg
  • Català
  • Čeština
  • Cymraeg
  • Dansk
  • Deutsch
  • Eesti
  • Ελληνικά
  • Español
  • Esperanto
  • Euskara
  • فارسی
  • Français
  • Frysk
  • Gaeilge
  • Gaelg
  • Galego
  • 한국어
  • Հայերեն
  • Hrvatski
  • Ido
  • Bahasa Indonesia
  • Íslenska
  • Italiano
  • עברית
  • ქართული
  • Қазақша
  • Kiswahili
  • Коми
  • Kurdî
  • Кырык мары
  • Latina
  • Latviešu
  • Lëtzebuergesch
  • Lietuvių
  • Magyar
  • Македонски
  • Malagasy
  • Монгол
  • Nāhuatl
  • Nederlands
  • 日本語
  • Norsk bokmål
  • Norsk nynorsk
  • Occitan
  • Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
  • Plattdüütsch
  • Polski
  • Português
  • Română
  • Runa Simi
  • Русский
  • Shqip
  • Simple English
  • Slovenčina
  • Slovenščina
  • Српски / srpski
  • Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
  • Suomi
  • Svenska
  • Tagalog
  • தமிழ்
  • ไทย
  • Türkçe
  • Українська
  • Tiếng Việt
  • 文言
  • Winaray
  • 粵語
  • 中文
  •  

Edit links

  • This page was last modified on 2 December 2016, at 23:12.
  • Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License
     ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms
    of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the
    Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  • Privacy policy
  • About Wikipedia
  • Disclaimers
  • Contact Wikipedia
  • Developers
  • Cookie statement
  • Mobile view

  • Wikimedia Foundation
  • Powered by MediaWiki

